Memory-safety annotation for inline assembly. (#12620)
ethereum/solidity: docs/assembly.rst

    Statically-sized memory arrays do not have a length field, but it might be added later
    to allow better convertibility between statically- and dynamically-sized arrays, so
    do not rely on this.

Memory Safety
=============

Without the use of inline assembly, the compiler can rely on memory to remain in a well-defined
state at all times. This is especially relevant for :ref:`the new code generation pipeline via Yul IR <ir-breaking-changes>`:
this code generation path can move local variables from stack to memory to avoid stack-too-deep errors and
perform additional memory optimizations, if it can rely on certain assumptions about memory use.

> While we recommend to always respect Solidity's memory model, it is possible to use memory
> in an incompatible way from inline assembly. Therefore, moving stack variables to memory and additional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we recommend to always respect Solidity's memory model, inline assembly allows you to use memory
in an incompatible way. Therefore, moving stack variables to memory and additional
```

memory optimizations are, by default, disabled in the presence of any inline assembly block.

However, you can specifically annotate an assembly block to indicate that it in fact respects Solidity's memory
model as follows:

.. code-block:: solidity

    /// @solidity memory-safe-assembly
    assembly {
        ...
    }

> In particular, a memory-safe assembly block has to follow the adhere to the following restriction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, a memory-safe assembly block has to adhere to the following restriction:
```

All accessed memory (read or written) was properly allocated. This can either be memory allocated by yourself
using a mechanism like the ``allocate`` function described above, or memory allocated by Solidity,
e.g. memory within the bounds of a memory array you reference. The only exception to this is the scratch space

> between memory offset 0 and 64 mentioned above.

Author: For this we still need to discuss what our actual requirements should really be, so I expect this to still change - for the rest of the docs, a review would be good already, though :-).

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add: Since this is mainly about the optimizer, it does not matter that there is no Solidity code following your assembly block. As an example, the following assembly snippet is not memory safe:
```
assembly {
  returndatacopy(0, returndatasize())
  revert(0, returndatasize())
}
```
But the following is:
```
/// @solidity memory-safe-assembly
assembly {
  let p := mload(0x60)
  returndatacopy(0x60, returndatasize())
  revert(0x60, returndatasize())
}
```
(note that you do not need to update the free memory pointer if there is no following allocation, but can only use memory starting with where the free memory pointer points to)

If the memory operations use a length of zero, it is also fine to just use any offset (not only if it falls into the scratch space):
```
/// @solidity memory-safe-assembly
assembly {
  revert(0, 0)
}
```

    Statically-sized memory arrays do not have a length field, but it might be added later
    to allow better convertibility between statically- and dynamically-sized arrays, so
    do not rely on this.

Memory Safety
=============

Without the use of inline assembly, the compiler can rely on memory to remain in a well-defined
state at all times. This is especially relevant for :ref:`the new code generation pipeline via Yul IR <ir-breaking-changes>`:
this code generation path can move local variables from stack to memory to avoid stack-too-deep errors and
perform additional memory optimizations, if it can rely on certain assumptions about memory use.

While we recommend to always respect Solidity's memory model, inline assembly allows you to use memory
in an incompatible way. Therefore, moving stack variables to memory and additional memory optimizations are,

> by default, disabled in the presence of any inline assembly block.

Reviewer: Not true anymore

However, you can specifically annotate an assembly block to indicate that it in fact respects Solidity's memory
model as follows:

.. code-block:: solidity

    /// @solidity memory-safe-assembly
    assembly {
        ...
    }

> In particular, a memory-safe assembly block has to adhere to the following restriction:

Reviewer: Do you think we could hilight this a little?

Author: I'm not an expert for rst :-). I can try to find something, though.

> All accessed memory (read or written) was properly allocated. This can either be memory allocated by yourself

Reviewer: Do we want to say that it's fine to read or write to positions >= `mload(0x60)` without actually updating the pointer?

Reviewer: Ah, we actually say it below, so I would prefer this to be part of the specification.

using a mechanism like the ``allocate`` function described above, or memory allocated by Solidity,
e.g. memory within the bounds of a memory array you reference. The only exception to this is the scratch space
between memory offset 0 and 64 mentioned above.

> Since this is mainly about the optimizer, it does not matter that there is no Solidity code following your assembly block.

Reviewer: What I wanted to say is that it does not matter that the code reverts/terminates. Do you think this distinction is important?

Author: I just took this directly from your suggestion - but yes, it's probably clearer to say that it doesn't matter if the code revers or terminates.

As an example, the following assembly snippet is not memory safe:

.. code-block:: solidity

    assembly {
      returndatacopy(0, returndatasize())
      revert(0, returndatasize())
    }

But the following is:

.. code-block:: solidity

    /// @solidity memory-safe-assembly
    assembly {
      let p := mload(0x40)

>       returndatacopy(0x40, returndatasize())
>       revert(0x40, returndatasize())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      returndatacopy(p, returndatasize())
      revert(p, returndatasize())
```

While we recommend to always respect Solidity's memory model, inline assembly allows you to use memory
in an incompatible way. Therefore, moving stack variables to memory and additional memory optimizations are,
by default, disabled in the presence of any inline assembly block that contains a memory operation or assigns
to solidity variables in memory.

However, you can specifically annotate an assembly block to indicate that it in fact respects Solidity's memory
model as follows:

.. code-block:: solidity

    /// @solidity memory-safe-assembly
    assembly {
        ...
    }

In particular, a memory-safe assembly block may only access the following memory ranges:

- Memory allocated by yourself using a mechanism like the ``allocate`` function described above.
- Memory allocated by Solidity, e.g. memory within the bounds of a memory array you reference.
- The scratch space between memory offset 0 and 64 mentioned above.
- Temporary memory that is located *after* the value of the free memory pointer at the beginning of the assembly block,
  i.e. memory that is "allocated" at the free memory pointer without updating the free memory pointer.

> 

Reviewer: plus, if it writes to solidity memory variables, it can only assign allocated pointers or something like that.
